Create M6: Draft-Insufficient-Input-Output-Validation.md (#41)
OWASP/www-project-mobile-top-10: 2023-risks/M6: Draft-Insufficient-Input-Output-Validation.md

---

layout: col-sidebar
title: "M6: Insufficient Input/Output Validation"
---

# Threat Agents

**Application Specific**

If the application fails to properly validate and sanitize data received from external sources like user inputs or network data. This oversight can lead to various security vulnerabilities, such as SQL injection, Command Injection or cross-site scripting (XSS) attacks. 

> These attacks can lead to unauthorized data access, manipulation, and potentially compromise the entire system. 

Reviewer: Maybe replace the entire system with something mobile-specific. This wording seems like it is talking about backends.

Author: Yes, backend system or maybe we can replace it with Database?

Author: review pls.

Inadequate output validation can result in data corruption or presentation vulnerabilities, allowing malicious actors to inject malicious code or manipulate sensitive information displayed to users.

# Attack Vectors	

**Exploitability HIGH**

> Insufficient input/output validation exposes our application to critical attack vectors, including SQL injection, XSS, command injection, path traversal, HTML injection, and remote file inclusion. These vulnerabilities can lead to unauthorized access, data manipulation, code execution, and compromise of the entire system. 

Reviewer: I would remove remote file inclusion which is very rare on the client side due to the languages commonly in use in mobile apps.

Author: ok, will do

**Lack of Contextual Validation:** Failing to consider the specific context or expected data formats can result in vulnerabilities like SQL injection or format string vulnerabilities. These occur when unvalidated user input is directly incorporated into database queries or improperly handled in format string functions, allowing attackers to manipulate queries or execute arbitrary code.

**Failure to Validate Data Integrity:** Without validating data integrity, the application becomes vulnerable to data corruption or incorrect processing. Attackers can tamper with critical system variables or introduce malformed data that disrupts the application's functionality.

These vulnerabilities often arise from errors in application logic, incomplete implementation of validation checks, lack of security awareness, or insufficient testing and code review practices. 

# Technical Impacts

**Impact Severe** <br />

> Insufficient input/output validation vulnerability can have several technical impacts on the affected application:
> 
> **Code Execution:** A malicious actor can exploit this vulnerability to execute unauthorized code within the application's enviornment, bypassing the security measures.
> 
> **Data Breaches:** Insufficient validation can enables attackers to manipulate input, potentially leading to unauthorized access and extraction of sensitive data.
> 
> **System Compromise:** Attackers can gain unauthorized access to the underlying system, compromising it and potentially taking control.
> 
> **Application Disruption:** Malicious input can cause disruptions, crashes or data corruption, impacting the application's reliability and functionality.
> 
> **Reputation Damage:** Successful exploitation of this vulnerability can result in reputational harm due to data breaches and loss of customer's trust.
> 
> **Legal and Compliance Issues:** Inadequate validation may lead to legal liabilities, regulatory penalties and non compliance with data protection regulations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Insufficient input/output validation vulnerability can have several technical impacts on the affected application:

**Code Execution:** A malicious actor can exploit this vulnerability to execute unauthorized code within the application's environment, bypassing the security measures.

**Data Breaches:** Insufficient validation can enable attackers to manipulate input, potentially leading to unauthorized access and extraction of sensitive data.

**System Compromise:** Attackers can gain unauthorized access to the underlying system, compromising it and potentially taking control.

**Application Disruption:** Malicious input can cause disruptions, crashes, or data corruption, impacting the application's reliability and functionality.

**Reputation Damage:** Successful exploitation of this vulnerability can result in reputational harm due to data breaches and loss of customer trust.

**Legal and Compliance Issues:** Inadequate validation may lead to legal liabilities, regulatory penalties, and non-compliance with data protection regulations.
```

Author: noted

# Business Impacts
	
**Application/Business Specific** 

> Insufficient input/output validation vulnerability has significant technical and business implications. From a application standpoint, the impacts include:
> 
> - Code Execution: Attackers can exploit this vulnerability to execute unauthorized code, potentially leading to system compromise and unauthorized access.
> - Data Breaches: Insufficient validation allows attackers to manipulate input, resulting in data breaches and unauthorized access to sensitive information.
> - System Disruptions: Exploitation of the vulnerability can cause application crashes, instability, or data corruption, leading to service disruptions and operational inefficiencies.
> - Data Integrity Issues: Insufficient validation may result in data corruption, incorrect processing, or inaccurate outputs, compromising the reliability and integrity of the system.
> 
> On the business side, the impacts include:
> - Reputation Damage: Successful exploitation of the vulnerability can result in data breaches, system disruptions, and customer distrust, damaging the organization's reputation and brand image.
> - Legal and Compliance Consequences: Non-compliance with data protection regulations due to insufficient validation can lead to legal liabilities, regulatory penalties, and potential financial losses.
> - Financial Impact: Data breaches or system disruptions caused by the vulnerability can result in financial losses due to incident response, remediation costs, legal fees, and potential loss of revenue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Insufficient input/output validation vulnerability has significant technical and business implications. From an application standpoint, the impacts include:

- Code Execution: Attackers can exploit this vulnerability to execute unauthorized code, potentially leading to system compromise and unauthorized access.
- Data Breaches: Insufficient validation allows attackers to manipulate input, resulting in data breaches and unauthorized access to sensitive information.
- System Disruptions: Exploitation of the vulnerability can cause application crashes, instability, or data corruption, leading to service disruptions and operational inefficiencies.
- Data Integrity Issues: Insufficient validation may result in data corruption, incorrect processing, or inaccurate outputs, compromising the reliability and integrity of the system.

On the business side, the impacts include:
- Reputation Damage: Successful exploitation of the vulnerability can result in data breaches, system disruptions, and customer distrust, damaging the organization's reputation and brand image.
- Legal and Compliance Consequences: Non-compliance with data protection regulations due to insufficient validation can lead to legal liabilities, regulatory penalties, and potential financial losses.
- Financial Impact: Data breaches or system disruptions caused by the vulnerability can result in financial losses due to incident response, remediation costs, legal fees, and potential loss of revenue.
```

Author: noted.

# How Do I Prevent 'Insufficient Input/Output Validation'?

To prevent "Insufficient Input/Output Validation" vulnerabilities:
- Input Validation:
  - Validate and sanitize user input using strict validation techniques.
  - Implement input length restrictions and reject unexpected or malicious data.
- Output Sanitization:
  - Properly sanitize output data to prevent cross-site scripting (XSS) attacks.
  - Use output encoding techniques when displaying or transmitting data.
- Context-Specific Validation:
  - Perform specific validation based on data context (e.g., file uploads, database queries) to prevent attacks like path traversal or injection.
- Data Integrity Checks:
  - Implement data integrity checks to detect and prevent data corruption or unauthorized modifications.
- Secure Coding Practices:
  - Follow secure coding practices, such as using parameterized queries and prepared statements to prevent SQL injection.
- Regular Security Testing:
  - Conduct regular security assessments, including penetration testing and code reviews, to identify and address vulnerabilities.
 
# Example Attack Scenarios

**Scenario #1** SQL Injection

> An attacker can craft malicious input by appending SQL statements to user-provided data. For example, in a login form, an attacker could enter a specially crafted username like "' OR 1=1;--" which, if the application lacks proper input validation, can alter the intended SQL query. This can lead to the execution of unauthorized database operations, bypassing authentication, and potentially accessing sensitive information or gaining administrative privileges.

Reviewer: Need more Mobile nuances, like attack Providers.

Author: sure

Author: made some changes.

**Scenario #2** Cross Site Scripting

> An attacker inject malicious scripts into input fields such as comment sections or form inputs. When the application fails to adequately validate or sanitize this output data, the injected scripts are executed by unsuspecting users' browsers. This enables the attacker to steal session cookies, perform actions on behalf of the victim, or deface the website.

Reviewer: This is very web specific, need a different example.

Author: sure

Author: made some changes.

**Scenario #3** Command Injection

> An Attacker can exploit insufficient input validation by injecting malicious system commands into input fields. For example, an attacker might append a command like "; rm -rf /" to a user-provided filename, which, if the application does not properly validate the input, could result in the execution of the malicious command. This can lead to unauthorized access, data loss, or complete compromise of the underlying system.

Reviewer: Also very web specific.

Author: will look into it

Author: made some changes.
